Using Large Language Models to Develop
Requirements Elicitation Skills
Nelson Lojo
nelson.lojo@berkeley.edu
Univ. of California, Berkeley
CA, USA
Rafael Gonz´ alez
rgonzalez6@us.es
SCORE Lab, Univ. of Sevilla
Sevilla, Spain
Rohan Philip
rohanphilip1108@gmail.com
Oak Park High School
Oak Park, USA
Jos´ e Antonio Parejo
japarejo@us.es
SCORE Lab, Univ. of Sevilla
Sevilla, Spain
Amador Dur´ an Toro
amador@us.es
SCORE Lab, Univ. of Sevilla
Sevilla, Spain
Armando Fox
fox@berkeley.edu
Univ. of California, Berkeley
CA, USA
Pablo Fern´ andez
pablofm@us.es
SCORE Lab, Univ. of Sevilla
Sevilla, Spain
April 10, 2025
Abstract
Requirements Elicitation (RE) is a crucial software engineering skill
that involves interviewing a client and then devising a software design
based on the interview results. Teaching this inherently experiential skill
effectively has high cost, such as acquiring an industry partner to inter-
view, or training course staff or other students to play the role of a client.
As a result, a typical instructional approach is to provide students with
transcripts of real or fictitious interviews to analyze, which exercises the
skill of extracting technical requirements but fails to develop the equally
important interview skill itself. As an alternative, we propose conditioning
a large language model to play the role of the client during a chat-based
interview. We perform a between-subjects study ( n = 120) in which stu-
dents construct a high-level application design from either an interactive
LLM-backed interview session or an existing interview transcript describ-
ing the same business processes. We evaluate our approach using both a
1
arXiv:2503.07800v2  [cs.SE]  9 Apr 2025
qualitative survey and quantitative observations about participants’ work.
We find that both approaches provide sufficient information for partici-
pants to construct technically sound solutions and require comparable
time on task, but the LLM-based approach is preferred by most partici-
pants. Importantly, we observe that LLM-backed interview is seen as both
more realistic and more engaging, despite the LLM occasionally providing
imprecise or contradictory information. These results, combined with the
wide accessibility of LLMs, suggest a new way to practice critical RE skills
in a scalable and realistic manner without the overhead of arranging live
interviews.
Keywords
Computing education, Requirements analysis, Requirements elicitation, Natural
language generation, Generative Artificial Intelligence, Large Language Models,
Empirical studies, Experimentation
1 Introduction and Motivation
Team skills, including so-called “soft skills,” remain an area in which new en-
trants to the software engineering workforce are perceived to be underprepared
[8, 1]. One such skill is requirements elicitation (RE), one component of which
involves interviewing a (usually nontechnical) customer to understand a business
need and propose software-based solutions to support particular workflows. In
formal higher education, RE is usually taught or practiced by giving students a
transcript of a real or synthetic customer interview conducted by a team of one
or more engineers, and asking students to specify a technical design that meets
the needs expressed in the interview. In agile software methodologies, typical
specification artifacts include [10] UML class diagrams, entity-relationship dia-
grams, Class–Responsibility–Collaborator (CRC) cards, and user stories. Such
artifacts would be the inputs to a subsequent team technical meeting for plan-
ning the software architecture.
With this conventional approach to teaching RE, since students receive a
complete interview transcript, they do not develop interview skills. To address
this drawback, we propose an alternative approach enabled by large language
models (LLMs), in which AI agents take on specific roles to provide opportuni-
ties for students to practice team skills. We call our approach LEIA, for Learning
Enabled by Intelligent Assistants. In the case of RE, we align an LLM to play
the role of a nontechnical customer who knows their business well. We ask stu-
dents to first “interview” the customer LEIA (C-LEIA) via a chat-like interface,
and then to use an online tool to produce design artifacts that can be automati-
cally graded. By providing differently “conditioned” C-LEIAs corresponding to
businesses of varying complexity and customers of varying temperaments and
communication styles, we can give learners many opportunities to practice RE
before interacting with a live customer.
2
Our initial user study with computer science students in a requirements
elicitation course at a major research university focuses on the following research
questions:
RQ1: Is the C-LEIA capable of answering relevant questions to provide the
necessary and sufficient information to produce a valid technical solution,
while avoiding technical responses that could cue the learner?
RQ2: Do students using the C-LEIA exercise improve the skill of conducting RE
interviews with the goal of constructing technical artifacts?
RQ3: Compared with traditional transcript-based RE exercises, do students find
C-LEIA exercises to be an engaging and effective way to practice these
skills?
Our results suggest affirmative answers to all these questions. Section 2
reviews related work before introducing our approach and implementation in
detail in Section 3. We describe the design of our user study in Section 4
and present observations and results in Section 5. These provide the basis for
a discussion on validity threats, limitations, and future work (Section 6) and
conclusions (Section 7).
2 Related Work
Customer communication is known to be a major challenge in both agile [9, 15]
and non-agile [14] projects, and the challenge of requirements elicitation specifi-
cally [11]. Eliciting requirements by interviewing can be highly informative and
time-efficient, but the quality of information collected depends strongly on the
abilities of the interviewer [18], a skill that is difficult to address in conventional
classroom settings: Daun et al. [4] find that “RE is best instructed with expe-
riential learning using collaborative approaches, real stakeholder interactions,
or controlled environments simulating realistic experiences, rather than theory-
heavy instruction.” To that end, [3, 7] simulate client-developer interactions
with humans, where students conduct interviews with TAs, are interviewed by
TAs, or interview other students, respectively.
A less instructor-intensive method of practicing RE is to provide a student
or team of students with the transcript of a real or fictitious customer inter-
view, from which the students extract technical requirements. Indeed, [13] uses
LLMs to create such transcripts. But this method does not teach the skill of
how to conduct the interview , an essential part of the RE process in a profes-
sional setting. To that end, the same authors built [12] an “interactive robotic
tutor” to scaffold the interview skill in which the student is guided through
pre-authored structured questions representing a “good” interview, responding
to choices about what to ask next and getting instant feedback for incorrect
choices, rather than simulating a truly freeform interview.
In the pre-LLM era, certain approaches aligned more closely with our work:
[17] leveraged IBM Watson technologies to simulate a client, creating a more
3
Figure 1: A UML class diagram (left) representing a fragment of an e-commerce
site, and its representation (right) in the syntax of Mermaid (mermaid.js.org), a
Graphviz-like (graphviz.org) diagram-drawing tool that study participants use
to construct their diagrams.
natural conversational flow, while [5] developed a client interview simulator
restricted to a fixed set of predefined responses. Despite these efforts, such
methods could lead to awkward or rigid conversations so we believe that the
significant recent advances in LLM make this approach worth revisiting.
Finally, LLMs have also been used to “guide” interviewers during a RE
interview [2]; we consider this possibility in future work, but our present focus
is on using LLMs as interviewees rather than guides or coaches.
3 C-LEIA: Modeling a Nontechnical Customer
Note: If the paper is accepted, we will provide the complete prompt templates,
parameter sets, and anonymized participant data in a downloadable replication
package. Those details are omitted here due to lack of space.
We leverage the turn-based nature of interviews to generate dialogue with
inference-as-a-service APIs. Specifically, we align an LLM to play the role of
a small-business owner (the “client”) who wishes to have software developed
to support one or more business processes. Students will then use a chat-like
interface to interview the client about these processes and produce a UML class
diagram (Figure 1) showing a design to model them. We use the ”Assistants”
service provided by OpenAI to manage separate conversation threads with the
August 6th, 2024 snapshot of GPT 4o parametrized with a default temperature
of 1. We use this configuration both for interactive interviews and to generate
complete transcripts for our control group, as detailed below.
We focus on two aspects of alignment (i.e. shaping C-LEIA behaviors to
reflect its configured intentions), allowing us to describe a customer as a pair
of natural language paragraphs. Domain alignment refers to how well the C-
LEIA “knows its business” and can respond to questions about the workflows
that are to be supported by the proposed software. The LLM is guided to inte-
4
grate information about the reference solution to the specific business modeling
problem throughout the conversation, without straying too far or giving too
much away. Persona alignment covers various aspects of how a human cus-
tomer would respond to questions: is the customer collaborative or combative?
Are the customer’s responses to questions clear and concise, or are they vague
and incomplete, requiring follow-up questions? Persona alignment is particu-
larly important with respect to creating a realistic client-interview simulation.
We instruct the C-LEIA to intentionally add filler words, showcase emotions,
respond promptly enough to avoid disrupting the pace of the interview, and
generally simulate a realistic client conversation through the following guide-
lines:
• The C-LEIA must avoid behavior that reveals its AI nature.
• The C-LEIA should have no technical knowledge of software engineering
and should therefore be unable to respond to technical questions from the
interviewer or validate technical choices proposed by the interviewer.
• Responses should be natural, concise, and conversational, avoiding lists or
overly detailed explanations.
• The C-LEIA must not “guide the conversation” by providing more infor-
mation than is requested, responding only to specific inquiries and refrain-
ing from using technical terminology or addressing technical concepts.
• For vague or broad questions, the C-LEIA should provide general re-
sponses and request clarification, as a client without technical expertise
might do.
In addition to serving as a conversation agent, the C-LEIA was also used to
generate complete interview transcripts, such as would be provided to students
using the traditional method of teaching RE skills. We use these for the control
group of our study. For this task, we modified the persona alignment to task
the C-LEIA with simulating both parties (software engineer and nontechnical
client) in the entire interview process, resulting in a full transcript of a sim-
ulated interview based on the same solution alignment. The transcripts were
generated using the “Chat Completion” interface rather than the “Assistant”
API, maintaining the same model and default temperature of 1.
4 Study Design
A common way to teach the RE skills on which we focus is to give students a
complete natural language transcript of a real or synthetic interview between an
engineer and the client, and ask the student to extract technical requirements
from the transcript. To compare the efficacy of using a LEIA to this tradi-
tional approach, we conducted a between-subjects study. In the first session, all
participants (n = 120) solve simple design problems using both the traditional
5
transcript-based method and then by interviewing our C-LEIA. In the second
session, we randomly assign half the participants to a control group (CG) still
using transcripts and the rest to an experimental group (EG) using our C-LEIA,
with both groups solving the same significantly more complex design problem.
We then survey both groups regarding their experience with the assignment to
shed light on our research questions.
4.1 Participants
Participants consisted of three cohorts of students ( n = 40 in each) enrolled
in the same Requirements Engineering course at a major European research
university. The study was presented as an optional assignment in the course;
we offered up to 1 point of extra credit (10% of the total course grade) towards
their course grade for students who chose to participate. Initially, we announced
that half of the bonus would be awarded for participation in the two sessions that
conform the experiment, while the remaining half would depend on the quality
of their conceptual models, promoting thoughtful and accurate engagement.
However, after the experiment was completed, we decided to award the full point
to all participants, regardless of performance, in recognition of their commitment
to the study. Students were informed in advance that their anonymized data
would be used for publishable research. Students were also informed that they
could opt out of the study at any point without penalty; anyone who did so, or
who did not wish to participate, could do alternative extra credit activities worth
the same amount of credit, ensuring fairness and respecting their autonomy
throughout the process. Students also had access to other opportunities to earn
additional credits throughout the course (a total of 25% additional credits). We
believe that this ensured that students did not feel pressured to participate and
could engage at their discretion.
4.2 Study Design
Session 1, one hour, all participants:
1. 10 minutes: introduce Mermaid syntax (Figure 1, right) to ensure profi-
ciency with it in the modeling tasks.
2. 10 minutes: given an interview transcript implying a simple modeling task
requiring 3 entities with 2-3 attributes each, and 2 simple one-to-many and
many-to-many associations, use Mermaid to produce a UML class diagram
satisfying the design.
3. 5 minutes: instructor reviews reference solution to discuss potential errors
and reinforce good modeling practices.
4. 25 minutes: use the C-LEIA to interview a synthetic customer regard-
ing a different modeling task requiring 5-6 entities and 4-5 associations,
including one composition and reflexive and subclass relationships. This
6
task also included two ”open questions,” i.e. situations in which more
information was needed to complete the model. Use Mermaid to produce
a UML class diagram.
5. 15 minutes: review and evaluate participants’ solutions and explicitly ad-
dress the two modeling open questions.
Session 2: two hours, with the participants randomly assigned to equal-sized
control group (CG) or experimental group (EG). This more complex design
problem involves 8-9 entities with 2-3 attributes each and 6-7 associations, in-
cluding two compositions, 1-N and N-N multiplicities, reflexive and subclass
relationships, and four “open questions” about the modeling problem.
1. CG: Given the transcript (generated by the C-LEIA as described in Sec-
tion 3) of an interview reflecting the above design, (1) use the Mermaid
tool to construct a class diagram, (2) make note of any missing information
(open questions) about the design that would be needed to complete the
class diagram, (3) identify any information from the transcript that was
less essential/lower priority for completing the class diagram. Participants
had up to 105 minutes to turn in a solution, completed or not.
2. EG: same as CG, but rather than reading a transcript, conduct an inter-
view with the C-LEIA, which had been aligned to answer questions about
the same design problem.
3. 15 minutes: participants in both groups completed the same survey giving
feedback about the assignment, except that a subset of questions on the
survey relating specifically to the use of the C-LEIA were administered
only to the experimental group.
In both sessions, after each solution was submitted, the system provided an
automated evaluation (developed by the C-LEIA) comparing and identifying
the differences between the student’s solution with the pre-configured one and
generating a score from 1 to 10. Participants were advised that this prelimi-
nary evaluation is not fully accurate or comprehensive and is intended only for
information purposes.
5 Results and Discussion
To address our research questions, we use the survey responses (Figure 2) and
various metrics regarding the participants’ work products. Each column of the
plot represents one question of the survey (see Table 1), with the response
histograms for both CG and EG for each question. Q 5−7 were only asked of
the EG. We summarize each high-level finding in bold italic , followed by a
discussion of the supporting data.
7
Qid Question
Q1 The time provided to solve the exercise was sufficient.
Q2 The difficulty of the exercise was appropriate.
Q3 The solution provided by the instructors for evaluating the exercise made
sense.
Q4 The evaluation of my solution (compared with the solution provided by
instructors) was appropriate.
Q5* (EG only) The C-LEIA provided enough information to solve the design
problem.
Q6* (EG only) The C-LEIA provided useful information.
Q7* (EG only) The C-LEIA avoided technical jargon (regarding software engi-
neering and development) in its responses.
Q8* The interaction with the C-LEIA helped me to improve as an active
listener—understanding both what is said and what is unsaid, identifying
the nuances and underlying concerns that may not be immediately appar-
ent.
Q9* The interaction with the C-LEIA improved my ability to communicate
clearly and ask more accurate and precise questions.
Q10* Interacting with the C-LEIA could help me improve in asking open-ended
questions, which are essential for encouraging expansive responses and un-
covering missing client needs/requirements.
Q11* Through interaction with the C-LEIA, I could enhance my ability to ask
closed-ended questions, which are crucial for clarifying specific points and
ensuring accuracy in understanding client requirements.
Q12* Interacting with the C-LEIA could help me improve in identifying and
managing different stakeholders, each with their own needs, priorities, and
influence on the project.
Q13 I felt engaged with the task.
Q14 The interaction with the tool used for gathering requirements (C-LEIA or
Transcript) was motivating.
Q15 The tool used to elicit requirements information kept me interested in the
activity.
Table 1: Likert scale survey questions (*=optional). The form also solicited
free-text comments. Q 5−7 were only given to the experimental group. Q 14−15
were answered by the control group with respect to the transcript and by the
experimental group with respect to the C-LEIA session.
8
5.1 Was the Exercise Valid? (Q 1−4)
Participants understood the tasks, generally found them to be of suit-
able difficulty, and generally felt they had sufficient time to complete
them. A majority agree or strongly agree that the time allocated was sufficient
(Q1). The perception of having sufficient time to complete the exercise was
slightly better in the experimental group than the control group, which is inter-
esting for two reasons. First, interacting with an AI would likely take more time
than working from transcripts: students must think of questions, type them in,
and then read the answers to design the model, while students using the tran-
scription only have to read questions and answers. Second, actual time spent
(hours) was comparable between the CG (min/max/µ/σ = 0.38/1.34/0.86/0.19)
and the EG (0 .42/1.39/0.85/0.42). Although we omit the histograms due to
space limitations, a relatively low Earth Mover’s Distance[6] of 0 .3708 suggests
the distribution shapes are similar, though a Sum of Absolute Differences[6] of
26.2246 suggests distinct patterns in the groups’ duration distributions, with
wider dispersion in the experimental group.
A majority agreed that the difficulty level was appropriate (Q 2). In both
groups, the evaluation of participants’ solutions (Q 4) appears to have been a
source of frustration, particularly due to limitations in the comparison method-
ology and the simplistic calculation of scores assigned to the models. We note
that in the present study, student scores were not used to validate the research
questions, since all of the students’ solutions were ”above threshold” of correct-
ness for demonstrating an understanding of the material, nor were they a factor
in the amount of extra credit granted to study participants. For these reasons,
we do not consider these negative responses a threat to validity, and we felt
confident surveying participants about other aspects of the study experience.
5.2 RQ1: LEIA behavior (Q 5−7)
The C-LEIA provided coherent, sufficient, and useful information for
completing the design, mostly without giving away technical aspects
of the solution. EG participants agreed or strongly agreed that it provided
sufficient (57%) and useful (81%) information; regarding whether the C-LEIA
successfully avoided technical jargon responses were even slightly better (85%).
Overall, responses reveal an overwhelmingly positive experience regarding the
behavior of the C-LEIA, with a majority explicitly stating that no erratic, inap-
propriate, offensive, or incoherent behaviors were observed during the session,
and that the C-LEIA facilitated the elicitation process without significant issues.
5.3 RQ2: Developing Interview Skills (Q 8−12)
Compared to CG participants, EG participants more strongly agree
that the exercise helps them improve key RE skills, including stake-
holder identification, question formulation, clear communication, and
active listening. (P01: ”It is more realistic and prepares us better for the fu-
9
Figure 2: Likert-scale responses to survey questions in Table 1, grouped by
Research Question relevance. Since some questions are optional, the total height
(total number of responses) is not equal for all questions. In particular, as the
text describes, Q 8−12 had a particularly low response rate in the control group.
The text also discusses freeform observations written in the surveys that identify
both limitations and possible future work.
ture.”) Significantly, the response rate for these questions was much lower in
the CG than in the EG, possibly suggesting that CG participants felt either less
motivated or less sufficiently informed to give an opinion on these questions.
Interviewing is a distinct skill exercised by the C-LEIA as com-
pared to the transcript-based approach. While all solutions were substan-
tially correct, the CG’s class diagrams tended to include more classes (min/max/µ/σ =
6/18/10.61/2.67) than the EG’s solutions (4 /12/7.68/1.57). As well, the total
number of class attributes across all classes in the solution was higher for the CG
(min/max/µ/σ = 12/62/28.32/8.83) than for the EG (6 /35/15.30/4.97). The
transcripts given to the CG contain detailed information, whereas the EG must
explicitly elicit this information during the interview. Indeed, in professional
practice, it is common to request follow-up interviews as the result of trying to
create a design with what is discovered to be incomplete information later. EG
participants are therefore forced to exercise this skill.
10
5.4 RQ3: Engagement (Q 13−15)
The C-LEIA approach is more consistently able to maintain interest,
enhance motivation, and foster overall task engagement. Some of this
superiority can be attributed to the novelty of the approach, though we tried to
mitigate this by giving all participants access to the C-LEIA in Session 1, but
some is likely due to the C-LEIA’s interactive and adaptive nature. In contrast,
the transcript-based approach showed good value but was less consistent in its
ability to engage participants, as evidenced by the higher presence of neutral
and disagreement responses. Finally, in the freeform comments, EG participants
found it highly valuable to ask an unlimited number of questions in their own
way to explore requirements (P48: ”The AI allows you to ask more questions
than you have in the transcript to clarify doubts”), something seen as a key
C-LEIA strength that led to deeper engagement with the task.
An overwhelming majority of participants preferred the C-LEIA
over transcripts, with stronger preference among those who used it
more. The preference for C-LEIA over transcripts was 61% to 39% in the CG
and 85% to 15% in the EG. The EG’s higher margin of preference is compatible
with the conclusion that the C-LEIA not only aligns more closely with skill
development objectives, but also fosters greater engagement and perceived value
among participants.
6 Threats to Validity, Limitations, Future Work
Some of the enthusiasm for using the C-LEIA may be attributable to novelty,
though we attempted to mitigate both this enthusiasm and possible nocebo
effects [16] (negative expectations about the treatment lead to outcomes that
are worse than would have occurred otherwise) by exposing all participants
to the C-LEIA in Session 1 of the study. Also, some participants identified
weaknesses in our approach or instances of less-than-optimal behavior of the
C-LEIA. We summarize a few recurring themes with illustrative quotes from
survey responses, using these as a way to suggest future work. (The language
of instruction and of the survey was not English; we used Google Translate to
translate both the survey questions and responses for this paper.)
Evaluation of student work products. Although one motivation for
having participants submit a machine-readable rather than hand-drawn class
diagram was to allow for the possibility of automated grading, the automatic
grading scheme used in this study to compare participants’ solutions to the
reference solution was simplistic. While it was sufficient to ensure that partic-
ipants’ solutions were substantially correct and avoid significant threats to the
study’s validity, participants felt less positive about this aspect of the study
than any other (Q3–Q4). (P15: ”The evaluation does not give enough flex-
ibility. There are multiple correct ways to model the exercise.”) We see an
exciting opportunity for future work to develop more sophisticated automatic
evaluation of these designs, possibly including other design deliverables such as
11
Class-Responsibility-Collaborator (CRC) cards and user stories [10].
Inconsistent/contradictory information given. One recurring issue
was the C-LEIA’s occasional tendency to contradict itself, for example, by ini-
tially suggesting a relationship between entities and later claiming that the
relationship was unnecessary. Similarly, the C-LEIA occasionally introduced
new attributes, properties, or requirements as the session went on, which were
not part of the solution. Both kinds of inconsistencies created confusion for
participants. In fact, in practice, this fluctuation of requirements is common
with real customers; but for pedagogy, we would like to carefully control when
it happens rather than having it happen unexpectedly to a student, as in this
case. We anticipate that further LLM alignment will mitigate this problem.
Insufficient background information made it challenging to con-
duct the interview. Starting the interview process without guidance or con-
textual cues was challenging for some participants, particularly those without
prior interview experience. (P42: “Provide some context about the system to
be developed, for anyone who is going to use AI. I think it would make the
exercise a bit easier and help us ask better questions.”) In contrast the CG
participants only needed to passively read a transcript rather than initiate a
conversation. An immediate mitigation is to include a basic background doc-
ument that students could read before beginning the interview or reading the
transcript. However, a more interesting future avenue (in our opinion) is a
complementary T-LEIA—a ”team whisperer” or coach, independent of the C-
LEIA, that can give less-experienced students proactive guidance on initiating
and conducting the interview by helping to formulate guiding questions, en-
suring the discussion stays on track, and so on. Conversely, to increase the
difficulty level (and possibly realism) of the task, we plan to experiment with
our persona alignment to simulate ”more difficult” customers whose answers
lead to a need for followup interviews, either to get more information or clarify
ambiguous information from first interview, or customers who are indecisive or
unclear in their explanations.
Occasional imprecise or less-than-relevant answers to nuanced ques-
tions. While the C-LEIA generally performed well, participants reported that
it occasionally struggled to provide precise or relevant answers, especially when
questions were very specific or nuanced. Some noted that the AI would some-
times repeat responses or provide ambiguous answers, which could disrupt the
flow of the elicitation process. (P88: ”If you are too specific, you don’t get
enough information. If you are too broad, it feels like you’re trying not to
’break’ [the C-LEIA].”; P63: ”The main limitation is the precision of the an-
swers.”)
Artificial feel of the interaction. While the C-LEIA came close to mim-
icking a real client, many respondents felt that it lacked the subtlety and depth
of a human interview, particularly in its inability to convey non-verbal cues or
contextual hints (P67: ”It doesn’t feel real, although it was close enough”).
This artificiality sometimes created a sense of detachment, which limited its ef-
fectiveness in fully simulating real-world scenarios. Additionally, the C-LEIA’s
reliance on carefully structured questions meant that it often failed to provide
12
additional information unless explicitly asked, which could limit the flow of
discovery.
7 Conclusions
Despite using a prototype C-LEIA whose limitations were noted by study par-
ticipants, our initial study yielded promising results:
• The C-LEIA provides a sufficiently sound and interviewable simulacrum
of a nontechnical client representing a small business, providing enough
information to produce a viable design without directly disclosing the
technical details that underpin the design.
• The vast majority of participants clearly preferred using the C-LEIA over
static transcripts.
• Time on task using the C-LEIA is comparable to that for using transcripts,
yet the C-LEIA appears to foster better task engagement and motivation.
• Participants using the C-LEIA agree more strongly than those using tran-
scripts that the exercises are helping them improve key RE skills, and
in particular, their solutions compared to a control group suggest that
interview skills are specifically being exercised.
These findings suggest that AI-driven tools hold significant potential for
enhancing user engagement in tasks that require sustained attention and active
participation like those addressed in the exercise.
The accessibility and convenience of LLMs already provides a promising
way to practice requirements elicitation without the logistical complexities of
arranging live interviews. We believe that refining our prototype, and combining
it with more sophisticated automatic grading, will lead to a novel, realistic, and
scalable way to teach RE interview skills.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Grant #00005919 from the California Educa-
tion Learning Lab (calearninglab.org), an initiative of the California Governor’s
Office of Planning and Research. This publication was also partially supported
by the R&D projects PID2021-126227NB-C21, and PID2021-126227NB-C22
funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/FEDER/UE; and by the R&D
projects TED2021-131023B-C21 and TED2021-131023B-C22 funded by MICI-
U/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR.
13
References
[1] Deniz Akdur. Analysis of software engineering skills gap in the industry.
ACM Transactions on Computing Education , 23:1 – 28, 2022.
[2] Chetan Arora, John Grundy, and Mohamed Abdelrazek. Advancing re-
quirements engineering through generative ai: Assessing the role of llms,
2023.
[3] Muneera Bano, Didar Zowghi, Alessio Ferrari, Paola Spoletini, and Beatrice
Donati. Teaching requirements elicitation interviews: an empirical study
of learning from mistakes. Requir. Eng., 24(3):259–289, September 2019.
[4] Marian Daun, Alicia M. Grubb, and Bastian Tenbergen. A survey of in-
structional approaches in the requirements engineering education litera-
ture. In 2021 IEEE 29th International Requirements Engineering Confer-
ence (RE), pages 257–268, 2021.
[5] Sourav Debnath and Paola Spoletini. Designing a virtual client for require-
ments elicitation interviews. In Requirements Engineering: Foundation for
Software Quality: 26th International Working Conference, REFSQ 2020,
Pisa, Italy, March 24–27, 2020, Proceedings 26 , pages 160–166. Springer,
2020.
[6] Michel-Marie Deza and Elena Deza. Dictionary of distances. Elsevier, 2006.
[7] Beatrice Donati, Alessio Ferrari, Paola Spoletini, and Stefania Gnesi. Com-
mon mistakes of student analysts in requirements elicitation interviews.
volume 10153, pages 148–164, 02 2017.
[8] R. Dubey and V. Tiwari. Operationalisation of soft skill attributes and
determining the existing gap in novice ict professionals. Int. J. Inf. Manag. ,
50:375–386, 2020.
[9] T. El-Najar, I. Ahmad, and M. Alkandari. Client Communication: A Major
Issue in Agile Development. International Journal of Software Engineering
and its Applications , 10:113–130, 2016.
[10] Armando Fox and David Patterson. Engineering Software as a Service:
An Agile Approach Using Cloud Computing . Strawberry Canyon LLC, San
Francisco, CA, 2nd edition edition, 2022.
[11] Ilyuza Gizzatullina. Empirical study of customer communication problem
in agile requirements engineering. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM
Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Sympo-
sium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2019) , pages
1262–1264. ACM, 2019.
[12] Binnur G¨ orer and Fatma Ba¸ sak Aydemir. RoboREIT: an Interactive
Robotic Tutor with Instructive Feedback Component for Requirements
Elicitation Interview Training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07538 , 2023.
14
[13] Binnur G¨ orer and Fatma Ba¸ sak Aydemir. GPT-Powered Elicitation In-
terview Script Generator for Requirements Engineering Training. In 2024
IEEE 32nd International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , vol-
ume 33, pages 372–379. IEEE, 2024.
[14] I. Inayat, S. S. Salim, S. Marczak, M. Daneva, and S. Shamshirband. A
systematic literature review on agile requirements engineering practices and
challenges. Computers in Human Behavior , 51:915–929, 2015.
[15] M. Korkala, M. Pikkarainen, and K. Conboy. Distributed Agile Develop-
ment: A Case Study of Customer Communication Challenges. In P. Abra-
hamsson, M. Marchesi, and F. Maurer, editors, Agile Processes in Software
Engineering and Extreme Programming (XP 2009) , volume 31 of Lecture
Notes in Business Information Processing , pages 161–167. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2009.
[16] T. Kosch, Robin Welsch, L. Chuang, and Albrecht Schmidt. The placebo
effect of artificial intelligence in human–computer interaction. ACM Trans-
actions on Computer-Human Interaction , 29:1 – 32, 2022.
[17] Muhammad Laiq and Oscar Dieste. Chatbot-based interview simulator: A
feasible approach to train novice requirements engineers. In 2020 10th In-
ternational Workshop on Requirements Engineering Education and Train-
ing (REET) , pages 1–8, 2020.
[18] Didar Zowghi and Chad Coulin. Requirements Elicitation: A Survey of
Techniques, Approaches, and Tools , pages 19–46. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
15